H.P. Chief Resigns After Harassment Inquiry

Hewlett-Packard said Friday that its chief executive, Mark V. Hurd, was resigning immediately after an investigation into a claim of sexual harassment, The New York Times reports.

The decision, the board said in a statement, was made following an investigation against Mr. Hurd and the company by a former contractor.

While the investigation determined there was no violation of H.P.’s sexual harassment policy, it did find violations of the company’s standards of business conduct.

In a statement, the board said that it had appointed the chief financial officer, Cathie Lesjak, 51, to the job of chief executive on an interim basis.

More from the H.P. press release:

Hurd said: “As the investigation progressed, I realized there were instances in which I did not live up to the standards and principles of trust, respect and integrity that I have espoused at HP and which have guided me throughout my career. After a number of discussions with members of the board, I will move aside and the board will search for new leadership. This is a painful decision for me to make after five years at HP, but I believe it would be difficult for me to continue as an effective leader at HP and I believe this is the only decision the board and I could make at this time. I want to stress that this in no way reflects on the operating performance or financial integrity of HP.”

“The corporation is exceptionally well positioned strategically,” Hurd continued. “HP has an extremely talented executive team supported by a dedicated and customer focused work force. I expect that the company will continue to be successful in the future.”

Robert Ryan, lead independent director of the Board, said: “The board deliberated extensively on this matter. It recognizes the considerable value that Mark has contributed to HP over the past five years in establishing us as a leader in the industry. He has worked tirelessly to improve the value of HP, and we greatly appreciate his efforts. He is leaving this company in the hands of a very talented team of executives. This departure was not related in any way to the company’s operational performance or financial condition, both of which remain strong. The board recognizes that this change in leadership is unexpected news for everyone associated with HP, but we have strong leaders driving our businesses, and strong teams of employees driving performance.”

“The scale, global reach, broad portfolio, financial strength and, very importantly, the depth and talent of the HP team are sustainable advantages that uniquely position the company for the future,” said Lesjak. “I accept the position of interim CEO with the clear goal to move the company forward in executing HP’s strategy for profitable growth. We have strong market momentum and our ability to execute is irrefutable as demonstrated by our Q3 preliminary results.”

Lesjak has taken herself out of consideration as the permanent CEO but will serve as interim CEO until the selection process is complete. Candidates from both inside and outside the company will be considered. The selection of a new chairman will occur in conjunction with the CEO decision.

Leading the search for a permanent replacement is a board committee that includes Marc Andreessen, the venture capitalist, and Lawrence T. Babbio Jr., the former Verizon executive and an adviser to Warburg Pincus.
