Leaderâs Absence During Floods Angers Pakistanis

ISLAMABAD, Pakistan â With Pakistanis bracing for more rain and floods, President Asif Ali Zardari struggled Friday to confront a barrage of criticism over his recent visit to Europe, undertaken while rivers gorged by monsoon rains ravaged large swaths of the country â a trip that critics have derided as âinsensitiveâ and a âjoyride.â

The flooding, which began in late July, has killed an estimated 1,600 people and affected a total of 14 million, according to relief agencies. Aid agencies and the United Nations warned Friday that the disaster was still mounting, with devastating outbreaks of water-borne disease an additional likelihood.

âWe want to warn everyone that the crisis facing Pakistan is enormous,â said Mengesha Kebede, a representative of the United Nations refugee agency. âThere continues to be massive destruction as the bloated rivers flow inexorably southwards across the plains.â

On Friday, a day after Mr. Zardari visited flood-affected areas in his native Sindh Province, a spokesman announced that the president would shorten, but not cancel, a planned visit to Russia and would forgo celebrations of Pakistanâs Independence Day later this month and instead visit flood victims.

Such gestures, some analysts said, may be inadequate.

âI think he is in serious trouble,â said Ikram Sehgal, a defense and political analyst based in Karachi. âIt was extremely insensitive of him to leave the country. It has gone down very badly and has left the country shaken.â

Health workers said that while supplies of food and safe drinking water have been a priority, they have been alarmed by health hazards from dirty floodwater warmed by summer heat.

âIf we donât act fast enough, the death toll will increase,â said Maurizio Giuliano, spokesman for the United Nations humanitarian effort. He said about 36,000 potentially lethal cases of acute diarrhea had been reported.

With flooding affecting as much as a quarter of the country and continuing, he said in a telephone interview, the relief effort is proving to be an enormous logistical challenge for the government and relief agencies.

âWeâre assessing a situation while the disaster is still evolving,â he said.

The death toll, as well as damage to the countryâs infrastructure and livestock, may be far greater than suggested by early estimates, Prime Minister Yousaf Raza Gilani said in a report carried by the state-run Associated Press of Pakistan.

The International Monetary Fund said the rising waters had caused major economic damage.

In southern Punjab Province on Friday, the government was trying to help large numbers of people on the move in Muzzafargarh District. Up to 800,000 people in the district were evacuated late Thursday and remained camped along the sides of roads, said Farasat Iqbal, the district administrator.

Many areas outside the districtâs main city, also called Muzzafargarh, remained flooded on Friday, Mr. Iqbal said.

âThe next 24 hours are crucial,â he said. âMany parts of the districts, including towns and villages, are inundated.â

New flooding also was reported in the Rajan Pur district in southern Punjab Province, said district police officer Suhail Zafar Chathha.

âThe water is five to six feet up in many towns and villages in the district, including the worst-hit areas of Jampur and Kot Mithan,â Mr. Chathha said. âMore than 60 percent of the population of the district is affected, and more flooding is coming.â

The damage is so extensive, some relief officials warned, that even an end to the rains will not bring an end to the emergency.

In a statement, Mr. Kebede, from the United Nations refugee agency, said that âthis crisis will not be over when the flood waters recedeâ and that hunger and illness would expose women and children in particular âto grave situations.â

Salman Masood reported from Islambad, and Waqar Gillani from Punjab Province, Pakistan. Kevin Drew contributed reporting from Hong Kong, and Alan Cowell from Paris.

